Gordon Volkman was one of these people.
We were interested in the fact that reflectivity
from the bottom is going to be disturbed by the
shape of the bottom. And it became apparent that If
the bottom was sloped, the reflections from the
bottom would appear to come in from a different
direction. Also, if one was looking down the ridge
of a mountain range, one would be in a shadow zone
for bottom reflected sound. If one was looking
down a valley, one would be in a sound channel from
the standpoint of reflected sound.
simple result of this kind of thinking, which
wasn't really very fundamental thinking, but it
was important to start thinking this way, was that
every spot on the ocean has its own directivity
index
for bottom reflected sound, so that both the
intensities and directions could change a great
deal upon the bottom configuration.
Also, another aspect of underwater sound, in
which a great deal of field work was done, both with
the standpoint of research work and also with the
possibility of working with aviators, was that it
quickly appeared one one night that if the source
was at the bottom, near the bottom of the ocean, in
fact, if it was at a depth in which, if the water was
deep and it was at a depth at which the sound
velocity equaled the velocity near the surface,
that about 20 miles, 15 to 20 miles away, there
would be a very strong convergence zone. And what
was at least as important was that at all ranges out
to that range,
near-surface targets would be in the direct path.
So this was called the Reliable Acoustic Path.
Actually, it was the Naval Research Laboratory
people who gave it that name and did some excellent
work on it. But this was sort of a new concept in our
game. It opened up the possibility of having
much deeper towed sonar. It had the possibility of
instrumentation, bottom mounted
instrumentation, in which we could listen to it.
If we were in deep water, we could listen to it out to
a range of 20 miles. out to a range of 10 miles, it
would get weaker and weaker, and then it would
start getting stronger and stronger. So this
opened up
the range of things that could be done
acoustically in the ocean a great deal. It was
another step in showing that if one was willing to
be more special purpose in the way one utilized
acoustics, then the ocean was a more benign place
than was usually given credit for. Let's shut it
off a
minute. Next, I would like to talk a little bit more
about the research ships and submersibles. As
mentioned earlier, transportation is an
extremely important part of oceanography. And
even after you get there, if the equipment isn't
good enough so that you can operate, you sort of
lost the purpose, lost the advantage of being
where you are.
There were two tacks on this. I decided this was
important enough to spend a good deal of time on it.
my bosses, both Hersey and Islin, and during much
of this time, Admiral Smith was director. I
started spending more time on it in two veins. One,
a group of oceanographers,
primarily under the sponsorship of ONR and with
their well wishes, etc., we set about to... try and
get some new ships designed. This went on over a
good many years, but it ended up in the Agor class,
about 180-foot ships, of which the Conrad was the
first, and which Lamont received that ship. And
this gave them a dual ship capability, because
they had the Vima and the Conrad.
The Conrad had all sorts of problems in the
beginning. The
Lamont wanted to operate it themselves rather
than running a chance of a Union crew. There
was a gas turbine on auxiliary power, which was a
little bit too new to be very reliable.
A good deal of discussion is whether it was
incompetence on the part of the user or
incompetence on the part of the builder or
incompetence on the part of the specs. But finally
the ship got out of the shipyard, and Lamont got it
home and put it to work and altered some of the
equipment, and it has been a very fine ship since.
Along parallel with this, program of getting new
ships was getting some ships to keep going in the
game. At this stage, I want to pay particular
homage to Commander Charlie Bishop, who was in
ONR, in the Undersea Warfare Section, who did a
marvelous job, as a fellow named Bill Groverman
had done before him, Both of these people had a
civilian compatriot called J.W. Smith, or James
Smith, who was one of the better organizers and in a
quiet way was one of the visionary people in
oceanography. I think plate tectonics and a great
many things in oceanography have much to be said
for these people because they made it possible for
American oceanography to go global. in a
large-scale sense. At this time, Frosch had
become director at Hudson Laboratories. And in my
own case, I set out to try and find what ships that
were in the reserve fleets would be available. We
or I, I was doing most of the legwork. Checking was a
great many people, both within the Navy, Maritime
Administration, and amongst the laboratories.
We settled down to about four ships, one of which
was the Army FS class, about 180 footer, which
subsequently, these were obtained by University
of Rhode Island. by Scripps, by the University of
Oregon, and several other organizations got
these as research ships. At Woods Hole, we felt one
of those would make an excellent replacement for
the Atlantis, but it was not capable enough to take
on the kind of work that some of us visualized ought
to be done.
The Navy fleet tug, which was about 200 feet long,
had to do about 14 knots and was big and tough, was
also a fine ship and available in supply. But
the working spaces on it would have required a
great deal of conversion in order to make them so it
had a logical layout for our work. Also, it was a
single screw ship, and we felt for
maneuverability purposes we should have it. The
Maritime Administration had a V-4 tug, which
looked very good, but there was very little
high seas work in which we could find people who had
operated them enough to know how good seaboats
they were. So we really settled on the on the Navy's
salvage ships, the ARSs.
Actually, the decision on my own part was made on
New Year's Eve of 1956 or 57. And after looking at
some other ships, I stopped off in Norfolk to take
another look at this ARS class and to All the boys
out in the salvage department of the Navy were
having a New Year's party, and obviously they felt
their ship was the best. And having ridden on
nearly all of these ships myself, I couldn't help
but agree with them. And even though it was more
complicated than we wanted and so big it kind of
frightened us, we decided that was the ship to lay
our money on. The primary criteria some of us kept
asking ourselves was if you had a job of operating
off Iceland or circling it in the wintertime,
which of these ships would you choose? This
appeared to be the toughest, best-riding ship
that was available in the reserve fleet in a size
that was small enough so that our bosses would
consider taking it. This was extremely important
because none of the oceanographic institutions
wanted to take, the private labs wanted to take on a
ship that was too big. Well, anyhow, J.W. Smith and
Charlie Bishop in O&R risked about 30% of their
next year's budget, which they hadn't received
yet and committed it, on getting the Argo for
Scripps, the chain for Woods Hole, and a still
bigger AVP ship for Bob Frosh at Hudson
Laboratories.
of particular interest here and to show the
versatility of the Navy group.
Woods Hole, Island would not accept a ship of this
size, so the Navy made the, at our request, at our
unofficial request, made the conversion, crewed
it for one year at the end of which time Woods Hole
could either take it over themselves or have the
MSTS crew continue. Scripps, on the other hand,
Revell wanted to have nothing to do with the Navy in
any part of it. He just wanted enough money to have
every aspect of the conversion handled by Scripps
and to have a Scripps crew.
Bob Frosch at Hudson Laboratories took exactly
the opposite view there. He wanted to have their
laboratory have no responsibility, really, for
the conversion or for the operation of the ship.
And ONR and their people saw to it that all three
requirements were met. This was a piece of
administrative flexibility which is seldom
seen, but it was certainly appreciated. These
ships were, as I'd said before, the ones that
really permitted the ocean-wide cruises
with large enough groups of people and enough
equipment to pretty much take on whatever problem
one wanted to take on.
We were very fortunate in the Office of Naval
Research, that Charlie Bishop, who was a
submarine man, was followed by Commander Swede
Momsen, who was also a submarine man, and
felt that submersibles made good sense for
science and good sense for the Navy to be involved
with. Not many people in oceanography seem to feel
that submersibles made very good sense. The
Navy's work with Trieste was such that some marine
biology and a tiny little bit of physical
oceanography had been done out of San Diego. But
they were not really, in any sense of the word, were
they workhorses of oceanography.
Cousteau, with his submersible, with his ship
Calypso and his submersible Surcouf, had devised
a submersible which was easy to use, was
rationally designed to be operated with the
surface ship that he had. And this submarine was
used in a variety of research to show some of its
potential. And the Westinghouse Electric
Company also got a submersible, had Casteau build
a submersible Deep Star for them, which was rented
and used. In my own thinking,
belay that. The Office of Native Research started
a deep submersible program for the combined use of
how deep should military submarines go to, and how
can you learn more about the background for such
things as that. and more particular for the
factors involved in making submersibles
go deeper for any purpose whatsoever. In this
vein, they sponsored work at the model basin. And
Ed Wink was a very important person here. He had
been a mechanical engineer at the model basin.
working in submarines. He then went down to
Southwest Research Institute.
ONR sponsored research work there on factors
having to do with deep submersibles and hull
design. Ed got in touch with
Lewis Reynolds, the Reynolds Metals Company, who
had been a, as a, very young man or boy had met Simon
Lake and was convinced that submarines had a
future. After he grew up and became one of the top
administrators in the Reynolds Metals Company,
he had the finances to do something about it.
So while a few oceanographers were concerned with
how one operates at depth, The ONR was putting some
money into this game, perhaps a quarter of a
million dollars a year in one way or another,
perhaps double that in some aspects. Ed Wink hit
the jackpot with Lewis Reynolds, and
preliminary work was proceeding on the design of
Illuminati.
I had been one of those people who felt the
submersible had a future. Hadn't worried too much
about the exact details of it, except that because
the ocean is up to six miles deep, you want to build
it to go as deep as is practical. But if it wasn't
going to be consistently usable, Then it had no
chance of selling. So what we tried to do was to find
a critical group of scientists, engineers,
financiers that thought that it made a good sense.
Then get an idea of the state of the art and the
amount of money that might be available and see
about how much of a submersible it was practical to
start out with.
The ONR had a had a meeting on deep water work in 56,
in which this received a good deal of discussion.
And actually, it was Bill Bascom who called
attention to the fact that, along with all the loud
talk, if we really had anything to say, we should
end up so that the assembled group had a specific
recommendation to give to the science world as a
whole, the Navy in particular. So the part that
Bill Bascom played in getting a specific
recommendation going that the United States
should have a deep submersible capability was
very important.
That report That meeting, incidentally, was
written up as the National Academy of Sciences
special publication.
Although the design work of the new submersible,
which turned out to be called Illuminat, was being
done at Southwest Research Institute under the
direction of Ed Wink and under the sponsorship of
Lewis Reynolds at Reynolds Metals Company. Fred
Spees from Scripps and myself were asked to serve
on the design committee as oceanographers to see
to it that it was compatible with the needs of
oceanography.
Those were very interesting times. The
fundamentals of designing a deep submersible
were pretty clear. It was largely a question of
what kind of materials, metals, sizes, and so
forth were consistent with the sort of a budget
that had better be in the low millions.
For myself, I never really worried. On a
philosophical point of view, I never worried
about the money, because the world was operating
about 40 research ships, 30 or 40 research ships,
of which the U.S. was running about half. All of
these would be more expensive than the
submersible, and most oceanographers would
gladly welcome another research ship, which
could only improve the overall global capability
by 3%. And it seemed logical that rather than
building another general-purpose research
ship, it would make more sense to build some
special purpose ships that could go down to the
bottom and look with the eyeball. And in
actuality, these are really perhaps more
comparable to the fact that the geologist has long
been associated with the burrow or the mule. And we
wanted some kind of a mule that would dive so we
could go down and look over the terrain that was
otherwise not accessible.
The general plan behind the Illuminaut was that
Reynolds would pay for it and sponsor it. The
electric boat company would build it and do the
detailed designs. UNR, through the hand and eye of
their assistant, the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Assistant, the Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, would rent it and operate it for
science. And then at some future date, it would be
decided that the submarine was paid for through
rental and it would belong to the Navy or to the
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. It turned
out that for a variety of reasons, many of which
were very legitimate and others probably seemed a
little fuzzier, the questions of operational
control and what good business were and were not
good business practices, neither Woods Hole and
Reynolds were not able to arrive at a common
document which would permit this to happen. Woods
Hole, here at Woods Hole, we had been working under
the general assumption this would happen, might
happen or would happen. We had begun to hire crew
for the Illuminat. ONR had started giving us half a
million dollars a year to prepare for this event
and to hire crew to start buying instrumentation
and getting ready. At this stage of the game, I want
to mention that the pilot we hired, or that I had
hired, was Bill, had looked up and found, was Bill
Rainey, who was one of the heroes of the small
submersible business, who was really the
operating, he was the chief pilot and the one most
responsible for it for many years.
along
about this time it was decided here at Woods Hole
that the ship the submersible program would be in
the under the general cognizance of Earl Hayes who
was in the Department of Ocean Engineering and
at At that time, I remained heavily involved with
it, but more in an advisory capacity than in a line
capacity.
When it became apparent that the submersible
aluminate was not going to come here, we
worked with
Harold Froelich from the electronics section of
General Mills, who had been proposing that they
build a small submersible called the CPOP. We
utilized his version of that submarine, which was
a very elementary, undersized submarine. Elvin
that here was something we could buy off the shelf.
We wouldn't need to rebuild and design a new
submarine. And this was used as the
administrative logic of why we should use the O and
R money we already had and were getting to go ahead
with a submersible program at Woods Hole. This
scheme worked, and Woods Hole ended up with a
submersible.
We wrote up a set of specifications. We wrote up a
set of specifications to alter the CPAP so it would
meet what we considered our requirements. This
turned out to be a good deal more of a submarine than
CPOP was. And the price jumped from $250,000 up to
$600,000 or $700,000.
Then because the Navy wanted to experiment with a
Navy-type steel, it was decided to build it out of a
Navy-type steel rather than a commercial-type
steel. This raised the price about $150,000, I
think, or some such thing as this, because it
involved a much more comprehensive test
procedure. Now, one of the very important things
in the submersible program was that many people
were involved. In fact, people from many
countries.
was involved, not so much in an official capacity.
But unofficially, everyone who had a submarine,
who wanted to build a submarine, operated pretty
much together, kept checking notes. We came to
pretty much the same kinds of meetings to find out
how things were going. It was clear there wasn't
enough money for everybody to do everything. So
what they tried to do was compare notes on
operations, notes on safety, to talk to other
people in the business so you could go home and tell
your bosses that if you didn't hurry, you'd be left
behind. And this was strictly a very favorable,
pleasant, international system of everybody
raising themselves with the bootstraps. This
submersible becomes the albin. When do you start
experimenting on
the width of the hull of the albin? Is this when you
begin to decide how thick the hull should be?
The work on how thick the hull should be is In one
sense, it's very complicated. In another sense,
it is very elementary. From simple geometry, you
can figure out what the forces are, because if you
build a submarine only to go shallow, it is so thin
that it is able to collapse in any number of funny
modes, and you need complicated ribs. And this is a
real job for the mathematical experts. However,
if you decide to build a whole of a simple form, like
a cylinder or even more so a sphere. And then you
design it to go deep. The hole gets thick enough so
it is what we call a simple, it would fail in pretty
close to the pressure of simple collapse. And you
would not have the thing going out of round and
getting into mathematical complications. until
you got almost to the ultimate point. So from this
standpoint, the deeper the submarine goes, the
easier it is to design. You choose the material on
the basis of corrosion, on the basis of its
strength-weight ratio, and on the basis of its
cost, and on the basis of whether You can weld it,
form it, and so forth.